docs/source/build_on_ubuntu.rst, before:


Building hpic2 on Ubuntu via spack
==================================

Those instuctions were tested on Ubuntu 22.04 LTS jammy.

Download and source spack
-------------------------

Install the package manager 
`spack <https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html>`_ 
as described in the 
`spack documentation <https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html>`_. 
Python 3.6 or later is required. Check also the 
`minimum system requirements <https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html#system-prerequisites>`_
which are assumed to be present on the machine where Spack is run. 

Download the spack repository 
(suggested location, ``$HOME`` directory)

.. code-block::

   git clone -c feature.manyFiles=true https://github.com/spack/spack.git


Source the spack environment

.. code-block::

   source $HOME/spack/share/spack/setup-env.sh


Since the source step is needed every time, 
we suggest to add the source command to your ``.bashrc`` file. 

Install hpic2 via Spack
-----------------------

Make a new spack repository for hpic2

.. code-block::

   spack repo create hpic2_dev


Register spack repository

.. code-block::

   spack repo add hpic2_dev


Change to the spack repository ``packages`` directory

.. code-block::

   cd /hpic2_dev/packages


Download the hpic2 source with its submodules

.. code-block::

   git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/lcpp-org/hpic2.git


Optionally, download the rustbca source

.. code-block::

   git clone https://github.com/lcpp-org/RustBCA.git


and rename it to ``rustbca``

.. code-block::

   mv RustBCA rustbca


Use spack to install hpic2

.. code-block::

   spack install hpic2+testing+rustbca ^kokkos+openmp


The ``+testing`` option enables the tests and 
the ``+rustbca`` option enables the RustBCA solver. 
The ``^kokkos+openmp`` option enables the OpenMP backend of Kokkos
to allow for shared-memory parallelism. 
The ``+cuda`` option enables the CUDA backend of Kokkos. 

.. warning::

   If the ``spack install`` command includes ``+rustbca``, it will take a while to
   complete if the rust dependency isn't already installed through spack. Depending on the speed of your machine this can 
   take up to 10 hours. Plan accordingly.

Commit message:

Add compilers and let spack find them

docs/source/build_on_ubuntu.rst, after:


Building hpic2 on Ubuntu via spack
==================================

These instructions were tested on Ubuntu 22.04 LTS jammy.

Ensure you have some basic compilers installed:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo apt install -y build-essential gfortran

Download and source spack
-------------------------

Install the package manager
`spack <https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html>`_
as described in the
`spack documentation <https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html>`_.
Python 3.6 or later is required. Check also the
`minimum system requirements <https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html#system-prerequisites>`_
which are assumed to be present on the machine where Spack is run.

Download the spack repository
(suggested location, ``$HOME`` directory)

.. code-block::

   git clone -c feature.manyFiles=true https://github.com/spack/spack.git


Source the spack environment

.. code-block::

   source $HOME/spack/share/spack/setup-env.sh


Since the source step is needed every time,
we suggest to add the source command to your ``.bashrc`` file.

Let Spack find your compilers

.. code-block:: bash

   spack compiler find

Install hpic2 via Spack
-----------------------

Make a new spack repository for hpic2

.. code-block::

   spack repo create hpic2_dev


Register spack repository

.. code-block::

   spack repo add hpic2_dev


Change to the spack repository ``packages`` directory

.. code-block::

   cd /hpic2_dev/packages


Download the hpic2 source with its submodules

.. code-block::

   git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/lcpp-org/hpic2.git


Optionally, download the rustbca source

.. code-block::

   git clone https://github.com/lcpp-org/RustBCA.git


and rename it to ``rustbca``

.. code-block::

   mv RustBCA rustbca


Use spack to install hpic2

.. code-block::

   spack install hpic2+testing+rustbca ^kokkos+openmp


The ``+testing`` option enables the tests and
the ``+rustbca`` option enables the RustBCA solver.
The ``^kokkos+openmp`` option enables the OpenMP backend of Kokkos
to allow for shared-memory parallelism.
The ``+cuda`` option enables the CUDA backend of Kokkos.

.. warning::

   If the ``spack install`` command includes ``+rustbca``, it will take a while to
   complete if the rust dependency isn't already installed through spack. Depending on the speed of your machine this can
   take up to 10 hours. Plan accordingly.
