docs/source/mesh.rst, before:

Mesh
=====

In hPIC2, the problem domain is always partitioned into a grid or mesh.
This page describes their construction and properties.

Uniform grid
------------

Uniform grids partition the domain into uniformly sized elements.
In one dimension, a line segment domain is partitioned into
identically sized line segments.
In two dimensions, a rectangular domain is partitioned into
squares.

Multi-block boundary layer
---------------------------

1D Non-uniform Grid
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


FD Stencil for 1D First Derivative
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



Unstructured mesh
-----------------

Suppose that the problem domain :math:`\Omega` is polyhedral.
A mesh :math:`\mathcal{T} = \{ T_1, \ldots, T_M \}`
of :math:`\Omega` is admissible if

#. :math:`\bar{\Omega} = \cup_{i=1}^M T_i`;
#. the interiors of elements do not overlap; and,
#. there are no hanging vertices, edges, or faces.

By a hanging vertex, we mean that if the vertex of one element intersects with
another element,
the intersection is the vertex of the other element,
and correspondingly for hanging edges and faces.

In one dimension, the elements are line segments.
In two dimensions, the elements are triangles or quadrilaterals.
In three dimensions, the elements are tetrahedra, hexahedra, wedges, or pyramids.

Commit message:

Short description of Multi-block boundary layer added

docs/source/mesh.rst, after:

Mesh
=====

In hPIC2, the problem domain is always partitioned into a grid or mesh.
This page describes their construction and properties.

Uniform grid
------------

Uniform grids partition the domain into uniformly sized elements.
In one dimension, a line segment domain is partitioned into
identically sized line segments.
In two dimensions, a rectangular domain is partitioned into
squares.

Multi-block boundary layer
----------------------------

A multi-block boundary layer grid is a type of grid that allows multiple blocks
of grids to be merged together with either uniform cell spacing or geometrically 
graded boundary layer type spacing. This enables large freedom of sampling and 
facilitate to deal the complex boundary layer problems more efficiently.
Multi-block boundary layer grid can be of any dimension, but in hPIC2 we only 
support 1D and 2D.  

1D multi-block boundary layer grid
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. figure:: figures/lowerbl.png
   :alt:

.. figure:: figures/uniform.png
   :alt:

.. figure:: figures/upperbl.png
   :alt:

.. figure:: figures/1d_block_structured_mesh.png
   :alt:

2D multi-block boundary layer grid
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


FD Stencil for 1D First Derivative
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^



Unstructured mesh
-----------------

Suppose that the problem domain :math:`\Omega` is polyhedral.
A mesh :math:`\mathcal{T} = \{ T_1, \ldots, T_M \}`
of :math:`\Omega` is admissible if

#. :math:`\bar{\Omega} = \cup_{i=1}^M T_i`;
#. the interiors of elements do not overlap; and,
#. there are no hanging vertices, edges, or faces.

By a hanging vertex, we mean that if the vertex of one element intersects with
another element,
the intersection is the vertex of the other element,
and correspondingly for hanging edges and faces.

In one dimension, the elements are line segments.
In two dimensions, the elements are triangles or quadrilaterals.
In three dimensions, the elements are tetrahedra, hexahedra, wedges, or pyramids.
